We're talking to Barney Rosenthal in Berkeley.
Go ahead, you were going to say something?
No, I'm just wondering what there is that I can tell you and what the direction of your... And I'm just taping it because then I'll know where we started.
This is the first interview for my next book, and I think, as I indicated to you, I think a showcase chapter will be... Yes.
I would like to give some flesh and blood to the...
to the frame that you provided for us here, I would like to go out and tell some of the stories of some of these people that you... Yes.
It's a great story, I believe, certainly, of your lecture.
Yeah.
Said to me, said to Roger Stoddard, Roger is the one who's urging me to do this, by the way.
I see.
Well, I couldn't get a more flattering reference.
He said, get Bernie's lecture.
I said, I have Bernie's lecture.
And he said...
And then just take it from there.
So I guess we just start.
Maybe we can just start a little bit of a biographical background.
I know some of it, but you are the son of a bookseller.
Yes.
And that is, maybe you could tell me a little bit about your own history.
And this will go any direction that you want.
Well, I can certainly do that, and it just so happens that I finished an autobiographical sketch that I wrote for my son and some of my relatives, and if you want to, I'll give you a copy of that, because that will be something that you can refer to in a...
And don't feel that you have to repeat information that's in there either.
Okay, well... Maybe for the purposes of this conversation, you could tell me some pertinent things.
Okay, well, I'll emphasize the book part, obviously, because I, contrary to popular opinion, I have lots of relatives who are not booksellers.
But both my grandfathers were booksellers, and very prominent booksellers.
And also one great-grandfather on the German side.
And then my father, who was Jacques Rosenthal's son, this is my paternal grandfather Jacques.
You're pointing to a picture on the wall as you do this.
Yes, that's a portrait of my grandfather Jacques done by
a then very famous painter, Lenbach, in Munich in 1904.
How would you spell that?
L-E-N-B-A-C-H.
And Lenbach was a book collector.
And he asked my grandfather to sit for a portrait.
My grandfather didn't want to, and then finally he was persuaded.
I need a pencil.
I have lots of pencils, by the way, if you need one.
There's one over there, for instance.
Okay.
Take your pick.
And when Lembach was finished with the portrait, my grandfather said, well, you know, I have to pay you what is your fee?
And the fee normally was enormous because he was a famous in-painter at the time, portrait painter, L-E-N-B-A-C-H.
And then I said, no, no, no, if you want to, just give me some books.
And so that's all he took in payment.
Anyway, Jacques Rosenthal, his name was Jacob, but he was a J-A-K-O-B.
And he became a great Francophile in the
days when he was very active.
He spent a lot of time in France, in Paris, and he changed his name to Jacques from Jacob.
So, and my other, my maternal grandfather, you can read that in my little biography, and by the way, did you ever read this, now I'm going off on a tangent, this lecture I gave at Harvard called the Olskys and the Rosenthal's,
Well, that's important, because that'll give you pretty much the background.
Olschke's are my mother's family, and the Rosenthal's my father's family.
That's essential.
And that was published in the Harvard Library Bulletin.
I don't think— I have a spare copy.
Hang on for a minute.
If not, I can get it at the F&AM or at Harvard.
It is O-L-S-C-K-I, Olschke.
O-L-S-C-H-K-I, sorry.
Okay.
I can get it.
I believe it was 1977, and it was also reprinted in the A.B.
Bookman's Weekly.
I can't tell you which issue, but about quite a while ago.
I can get it out of the Harvard... Yes, Harvard Library Bulletin.
And I'm sure that either I can write you the data or... Okay, fine.
I'll find it.
And so there I talk about my two grandfathers, mostly, the German side and the Italian side, and how...
They were friends, and some people say that it was a kind of an unarranged marriage, but anyway, whatever it was, it lasted almost sixty years.
They were, they rather dominated, I mean, in Italy, certainly, the book world was, there was only one other bookseller who could sort of hold a candle to my grandfather, Oshki, De Marini's very famous Italian bookseller.
Of course, the years will all be in these essays that you're... Yes, yes, the dates will all be in there.
So, then, I was born in Munich in 1920.
My father had, by that time, joined his father's firm.
And, well, I mean, books were always somehow part of our lives.
But... Did you know that you'd be a book person?
Oh, no.
I didn't want to be a book person at all.
When I left Germany in 1933, I was 13 years old, and my father was clever enough to see the writing on the wall.
And all of us, the entire family, except his parents, who didn't want to leave, were out of Germany by 1935.
So, and I... Life-saving perception, wasn't it?
It certainly was.
And then, for me and for one of my two brothers, it was relatively easy, because we just went to Italy and continued school there, because we, being half Italian and having learned Italian from the day we were babies, because mother always sought with her.
We spoke Italian with her.
She wanted us to grow up bilingual.
So we were able to just go from a German school to an Italian school.
It was difficult, but we could manage.
And so then it wasn't until 1939.
I'll make this long story short, because if I give you my autobiographical sketch, you'll see it all.
I came here to Berkeley in 1939 and studied chemistry.
and won a bachelor's degree, and I wasn't really cut out to be a chemist, but becoming a bookseller was certainly the furthest from my mind.
I was sort of interested in books as a kid.
I always bought books in Florence.
When I was a little kid in Florence, I'd go to the
to the people who were selling these sort of cheap paperbacks, and then I'd sneak into my grandfather's shop.
He had his own bindery, and there was an old book binder, and he would bind them in half cloth for me.
And so, you know, so I had, I guess, some kind of feeling for what books are or should be.
And it wasn't until I was 29 years old that I decided to become a bookseller after trying some other careers, because I liked the idea of, not so much because I liked some books particularly, but because I wanted something where I could be my own boss.
And then I liked it from the first day on, and people say, well, of course, you know, you've got books in your blood, but still.
I was 29 years old, as I keep telling people, when I first heard the name of Brunet.
That was, I'd never know.
And sure, I heard the names of Morgan and Carl Koep and Philip Hofer at the dinner table, but that doesn't make you into a bookseller.
The real nitty-gritty is... How about your father in all this?
Did he come to... My father was also a... became... He then, when his father retired and...
thank God, died before things got to be too bad in Germany.
A father took over the business in Munich in 1931 or 1932.
And then in 1935, it was, of course, had to be dissolved.
And then he moved to Switzerland, where we have a firm since 1920.
Again, you'll read all this.
And father carried on as a bookseller.
But he was really... I wrote a
something for him, an obituary, and it occurred to me then, when I was putting all my remembrances together, that he wasn't really happy being a merchant.
He was an esthete, he studied art history, he was a very good art historian, and I always had the feeling that he was sort of forced a little bit by his father, who was very strong, as you can tell.
from the portrait, he was sort of... When did the portrait, the portrait came with the family, of course.
The portrait was done in 1904.
I mean, it moved up.
It moved, we were able to say that, yeah.
And it so happens that it's hanging here now, but it belongs to the family.
So, but my father was quite successful, very successful, as a matter of fact, and one of his great
I must say, friends in this country was Rosenwald, whom you certainly know.
And I remember several trips he and I took together to see Lessing Rosenwald.
And particularly one time when Rosenwald was in California, this was in the 40s,
And he said, well, Dr. Rosenthal, he was always Dr. Rosenthal because he has a PhD in our history, and even we children called our father her doctor.
Really?
Yeah, but come in cheek.
And so Rosenwald said, why don't you come to Los Angeles?
I'd love to see you.
And then so my father said, my God, yes, I have nothing to show this man.
And finally he said, well, um,
I just take something, and he took a group of very remarkable medieval miniatures, illuminations.
But Roosevelt wasn't collecting that at all.
But my father said, well, this is a man who appreciates things, at least I have something to show him.
And so we went to this wonderful hotel, what was he called, in Beverly Hills, of course.
where you had little houses.
Oh, they just, that's, that's, the foreigners just bought that, I think, the, I know the one you mean, the Beverly Hills.
Something, yes.
It was really grand, and Roosevelt was in this little house.
It was being opened after a multi-million.
That, that's, well, yeah.
And so, um, um, and of course those were the days when you went down to Los Angeles with a decent train, luxurious, uh, luxurious roommate and all that sort of thing.
Father always liked to,
travel and style.
And so when we saw Rosenwald, my father showed him these things, and Rosenwald was, he never showed much emotion.
He kept a total poker face when he looked at things.
And he looked at these things, and then they chatted, and then he said, well, thank you very much.
And we wrapped up the miniatures and came home again.
And then a few weeks later, Rosenwald wrote and said, well,
Dad considers selling them our block.
And that was the beginning of the great collection, which is now in the National Gallery of Art.
That was the start of that collection?
And my dad is given full credit in the preface.
I can show it to you if you want to.
I have the preface.
Oh, you have it?
Okay, good.
That's the Rosenwald collection of... I have it.
It's the Szilard paperback book.
Yeah, I have it.
Gosh.
By the way, that's pretty valuable now.
I was looking for a copy for a friend.
That bibliography is my collection right now that I really love.
So my father had these... I think if you're interested in him, and you should be, because, after all, he's the first Rosenthal in America.
I'll give you the... Let me just interject.
I am.
Yes.
You remarked earlier on...
how I go after these chapters.
I really like to go after everything, so I am interested in everything.
Oh, oh, oh, okay.
Then I'll have to give you... We can think about it later.
I don't want to break up the narrative.
All right, very good.
I'll give you a copy of the obituary that I wrote because it contains some very particular information.
I like the way the narrative is going now, so why don't we keep that?
So, so much for Rosenwald, and then, well, I mean, some...
some anecdotes where we went to see him in Jenkintown a number of times.
And whenever Rosenwald really wanted something, or rather, my father would say, show him a group of miniatures.
And then Rosenwald would say, well, now tell me about them.
And then he would point to one and say, well, could you tell me honestly that this is
absolutely top quality.
And so sometimes her father would say, no, it's not top quality, but for that particular school of painting it's top quality, that sort of thing.
So Roosevelt has absolute confidence in, and rightly so, in my dad's judgment.
And the same thing went for woodcuts or illustrated books.
because he respected my dad's background as a professional art historian.
And this is something that you point out in this lecture that these booksellers brought, was not just the ability to do business, of course, because anybody can do business, but it's the knowledge and the trust that they established.
I mean, here's Rosenwald asking...
Just tell me what it is.
And when he tells you what it is, it's like a physician giving you a diagnosis, isn't it?
Yes.
It was very much a matter of just having absolute faith and confidence.
You don't really see that with many of the, and I don't mean to go off on another tangent, but you see so many people becoming booksellers, you know.
Where is the education and the knowledge that was so apparent with this one that came over?
Yes.
That is an amazing thing.
And of course, since we're now talking about these people, they were also people who were, well, has to realize what
America, by the way, we didn't call it, one never said United States, one always said America, or in our case, America, or in German, America, for us Italians.
And it was, it wasn't a country, it was almost looked upon as paradise, with Roosevelt as God.
And we didn't even realize that there was such a thing as a Republican Party, and
How could you not love Ross?
So when people came here in the 30s or in the late 30s, it was really coming to the Promised Land.
And so you have to, I think, realize this mindset that we had when we came here, even I as a 19-year-old, it was just incredible.
But you also point out, now this is a very affirmative thing,
arrival, but in many cases a lot of people didn't really expect to have, I mean, they were forced to come here.
Yes.
It was also escape, wasn't it?
None came because we wanted to, but once we knew that we had to escape, then America became, of course, the place.
Oh, yeah.
Some people were very German and never really
somehow were able to shed their German-ness, you know, and it was sometimes tragic to see, I knew a number of refugees who came here, but basically they were, they never left, you know, somehow intellectually or emotionally, and for them it was a terrible blow.
But the booksellers all adapted extremely well, also because our profession is, by nature, one that you can carry with you, so to speak.
Of course, to adapt extremely well is one thing, but beyond that, as Roger Stoddard points out, they actually brought about a major change.
I mean, the flow was redirected, rechanneled.
And he said, he made this extraordinary statement, he said,
so much of what you see here, and he said, I understand I'm not talking about Shakespeare, meaning... Yeah, right.
He said, you know, you know what I'm talking about.
He said, but so much of what we have here, you know, in a very evil, not evil, that's not the word you use, but in a bizarre sort of way, we owe to Hitler.
Oh, yeah.
And would you agree with that to some degree?
Yes.
Yes, I certainly would.
Now, that's not saying that there weren't American collectors, as you know much better than I do.
He said institutionally as well, by the way, not just.
And that's important part of my consideration, is that so much of this material was... In this lecture, I tell this joke, you know, what do European women, we don't have, you know, this joke, that this GI who comes home after the war,
his fiancée heard, you know, about all the goings on between the GIs and the girls in Europe, and so she asked him a little suspiciously, she said, tell me, Joe, I hear about all these things that were going on.
What did these European girls have that we don't have?
And he scratched his head for a minute and says, well, nothing really, but they had it over there.
And I tell you this story in the lecture.
Now, applied to books is that
First, the books were over there, but now this group brought them here.
And, of course, when we say brought them there, we're not talking about stock that they had.
We're talking about the context that they had, the markets that they developed over here.
Exactly.
The knowledge of where to get the material.
Of where to get the material, that's right, yeah.
And, you know, if you could talk a little bit about that, I mean, some people might think that, gee, well, how many books could they bring with them?
Well, this is a very naive thought.
Of course, I have to put this in some kind of context.
I'd like to kind of... Not sure I can tell you much about that.
Obviously, you cannot really schlep tons and tons and tons of books.
But how is it that tons and tons and tons of books ultimately did manage to come this way?
That came, I think, because of the connections that these people had
and went back to Europe after the war, and through these connections were able to buy a lot, and also during the war, you know, there was trade going on with Switzerland, for instance.
Now, would I be able to get some of these stories, you think, from some people that are still around?
Probably, but you know, this is a bit of a mystery to me, too.
I think that what happened really was that due to this
European element that came, maybe also librarians became more interested in this kind of continental book.
Institutional, right.
And obviously then used these people as their sources of supply, so that even without them actually coming in with tons of books,
They made the arrangements?
They made the arrangements.
In the case of my father, I know he had this firm in Switzerland, and lots of books came to Berkeley and then New York, where he had his office later on, from Switzerland, or from England.
And it seems like I keep mentioning Roger, it's because we spent two hours and he was just giving me his take on this thing, and he says, for instance, like Larry Powell, I guess.
I mean, he built these extraordinary collections down at UCLA, and in many cases through these... Yes, through dealers who settled in Los Angeles, yes.
Is that a true statement?
That I don't know, because I... You know, I didn't live all that much of that story.
I was more or less a...
by an onlooker, or not even that, because I have to tell you that I didn't start my own shop until 1953.
So, the war was well over.
And when I came here, I was busy studying, then I became a GI, I was a GI during the war, and then an apprentice in Switzerland, so it was, I didn't live this story, but I knew
all of them.
I knew all these people, practically all these people.
I knew Saloch and Schatzky and Offenbacher, and you named them, and I practically, all the ones that I mentioned here, I knew.
And I think it is they who sort of, what I call it, consciousness raising, or whatever it is, that they did here, and perhaps also due to the parallel
coming here of so many academics from Europe, Italian and German Jews, who became historians, art historians, teachers in the humanities and in science, that also they brought with them to their universities and through the universities to their librarians
a greater consciousness of the continental book.
So there was a great parallel movement, you know, of intellectuals.
And the people that you mentioned, will you be able to indicate how many of these are alive and that maybe I could talk to?
And I expect to do some traveling for them.
I can tell you... Let me see.
Do you have it?
Do we have it here?
Yeah, let's see.
There are...
Now, there are spouses, to whom you can talk, yes.
For instance, Ilse Burnett.
If you can just say that, we'll pick it up on this table.
Okay, Ilse Burnett would be here.
We're looking at page 17 of the letter.
Yes, up to the list of the gentle invaders.
Marguerite Goldschmidt in New York.
Well, Walter Johnson is an interesting case, and you have it on tape, but I don't think you should say anything about it, but he wants to have nothing to do with the past.
I don't know, you may have heard that or not, but Honey Kraus knows him.
He was a great competitor of Kraus, and had a large business, but he told me that he didn't want to.
Mrs. Goldsmith.
Yeah, Mrs. Goldsmith.
And to my great surprise, also the widow of Otto Ranschburg, who turned 90 in New York.
I just had a long talk with her on the phone.
The son of William Schaub, Frederick Schaub, who has an art gallery in
New York is about my age, but... A lot of them are in New York.
That's kind of... Right.
Oh, I see.
And Kurt Schwartz in... The widow of Kurt Schwartz, Martha, in Los Angeles.
So those are the only people that I could suggest where you could get, you know, first... So it's really kind of dwindling then, isn't it?
Oh, very much so.
Very much so.
And do you think any of this is recorded in oral history anywhere?
Well, what I did when I...
gave this lecture, I sent questionnaires to everyone, and they all answered, most of them.
And then, about five or six years ago, I sent all my source material to a German university.
So, unfortunately, I don't have it.
They are, I think it's the University of Hamburg.
But I can give you the thing.
I have to, the stuff is in the basement at home.
They have some sort of program where they want to collect all the biographies of the art historians and booksellers who left Germany.
That sounds like I should probably go there.
Well, probably.
And all of your material is in English?
My material is all in English.
But I'll give you the precise data.
And then there is... I'll write you on this.
We don't have to do this.
Very good.
We can do that.
And then I was recently interviewed a bit on the same subject, but more personal, I suppose, by someone at the German Booksellers Association.
They sent somebody here.
It's called, I'll then write it out for you, the Börsenverein für den Deutschen Buchhandel.
And they have a section of the antiquarian, no.
And the interview was in German, we were sitting right here.
And my German was just absolutely awful.
Was it kind of an oral history?
Is it kind of— They have an oral history about a lot of the things that were—some of the things that were coming in?
Yes.
Mm-hmm.
Okay.
So— And they also wanted to know particularly about the antiquariat Jacques Rosenthal, my grandfather, from Munich, and just exactly what happened in 1935, and who took it over, and—and—and so on and so forth.
Well, what happened in that case, do you know?
Was that— Well, yes.
We were extremely lucky.
Again, I think that's in the Olschke-Rosenthal lecture.
In 1935, the business had to be what they called Aryanized.
It had to become Aryan.
But my grandfather, Jacques, had among his employees, a senior employee, a gentleman by the name of Hans Koch, who made a contract to take over the firm
kept the name.
My father was already in Switzerland.
My grandfather and his wife were living in a hotel retired in Munich, and the contract was that he would take over.
He would become the owner of the shop.
It was a very grand place, you know, and he would
first of all, pay all the expenses for the grandparents, and then he was a very decent person, and he saw it more or less as his duty to keep as many books as possible, because he knew that sooner or later this wasn't going to last, you know, and just sell as, you know, enough to live on.
And then he was drafted into the German army, and walked to Moscow and back, and went through horrible things.
And he was the most unlikely soldier.
He was tall and thin, and he was from Lübeck, a sort of a straight-out-of-Thomas Mann figure, slightly stooped, but tough.
Anyway, and then he was finally in the Ardennes offensive, in the Battle of the Bulge, and I was
a few miles away on the other side.
We didn't know that, of course.
And then he was taken prisoner by the Allies and finally returned.
And under really immense hardship, he was able to save a lot of the stock, which didn't really amount to that much anymore, because my father had been able to send out quite a lot during the 30s.
And then we made a settlement with him and left him the firm and the name, and he sent some books, some of the better books, including a set of medieval manuscripts that then became my catalogue number one in 1953.
And we became and remained good friends, and I'm also a friend of his son.
So it was a very lucky thing that we had a decent person to...
Other booksellers fared flowers and had their books totally simply taken and stolen and sold.
Understanding this, I hope, is the first, this is a first opening conversation, and I'm just learning about the subject.
The next time we talk,
I promise you I will have a very much stronger background.
I have to start someplace.
I'm delighted.
So if I'm asking very naive, underformed questions now, I'm starting just from scratch.
And the beauty of this, from my standpoint, the beauty of this subject is it really hasn't been written up in any kind of a book yet, has it?
Right.
No, there have been articles.
Are you familiar with any of the articles that exist for you on the one side that you've done?
I'm only familiar with where there were occasional articles in the German equivalent.
Do you read German, by the way?
Unfortunately not.
There was one article, for instance, an interview with this fellow Hans Koch.
in in the what is essentially the german equivalent of the ab bookman's weekly it's but it's a bit on a higher level yeah so um i'm sorry to say i dropped my subscription but anyway i might do the same it just doesn't yeah and i just don't use that yeah well they have this joel silver who can he writes very well from here i like you other than that it's uh joel is using my book in his course so i'm oh really it's a
Well, I'm not surprised.
Your book will be, you know, I'm going to use your book as a reference book for provenance.
When I see Haber, Haber, take your book and look him up, you know.
Thank you.
So, or Brindley, when you, you know, you keep forgetting the dates and the circumstances.
No, but if I start complimenting you on your book,
I'm going to feel the tape, you know, so.
Right.
But what I want you to be sure of is that the next one, I hope to be a companion to this.
And this is, to me, after the first chapter, which is my continuum chapter, this is really, this is a showcase chapter.
It may be several chapters.
I really don't know.
It all depends on how much information I'm able to gather.
Right.
But it's a wonderful untold story, and I don't know if you're familiar with the book that was published last year, The Rape of Europa.
This is not the same thing, but it's kind of in that vein.
It's a cultural consequence of World War II.
Yes.
And it doesn't end.
It doesn't end.
Yes.
Now, you probably know American history far better than I do, but it seems to me that the...
There have only been two waves of intellectual immigration into this country.
One was in 1948.
I love that.
Yeah, that's a wonderful... It was the 1848, you know, Carl Schwarz and people like that.
And then these people, the others were, you know, the poor and the miserable ones.
And as I point out in my lecture, you know,
These people didn't come, and they didn't come steerage class.
And then, of course, all the academics came here.
Well, I mean, think of Einstein, people like that.
You start with Einstein, I guess.
Those are the luminaries.
But I knew quite a few of them.
I also knew there were a number of Italian Jewish refugees here at the university.
One of the physicists, Emilio Segre, who was one of the chief people of Los Alamos,
afterwards, felt terrible about it, but there were quite a few Italians here also.
I'm thinking of this now as you're talking, and I'm thinking in terms of how I see this.
We just place this within the context of this intellectual way, and it works.
Yes, it does.
It has a parallel, yeah.
It's really this infusion of... This country is so much richer for...
Yes, there is literature about that, but I don't know exactly where the... I mean, there is... And I can find that.
Yeah, I'm sure you can.
This is what I'm focusing on.
Pardon me for jumping all around the block.
No, I mean, that's fine.
I transcribe my own tapes, and when I go through this, and then I'll read it and underline it, and then I'll put together a really good, strong list.
And then the next time we talk, I'll be able to focus in on a few... Fine.
I only hope that I can contribute something.
Tell me what your time constraints are, by the way.
None.
I'm open for you.
I have an appointment at about quarter to one.
Okay, well, I was thinking about two hours.
Two hours, that's fine, yeah.
Actually, even an hour, people tend to get tired, but if I can squeeze, if I can get two out of this, I'd be thrilled.
I certainly have that time if you can think of enough to talk about it.
And give me a chance to absorb this stuff and to look at it and to establish the rapport.
Now I can call you on the phone and we know what we look like.
And I'm sorry I broke up your train of thought there.
Such as it was, yeah.
I think it's going to be a wonderful story.
And most of these people you see are in New York, a few in Los Angeles.
Yes.
And you point out in the lecture also that they all didn't come here, some went up to Toronto, a few... Yes.
Now, there is a book about this remarkable man who went to Canada, and I'll pull it out for you.
Um... Um...
Let me pull it out right away before we forget.
Then I can write it down.
His name was Bernard Amtman.
I'll just write it down.
Let me just keep on talking about Bernard, A-M-T.
And I knew him quite well.
He was a one-man tornado.
came to Canada after the war.
I mean, I think it's all in here.
I think he was in the coffee business in Austria or something.
He had absolutely no background, and started in Montreal, I believe.
Yeah, Montreal.
Well, I'm just writing out of the bibliographical information here, and I'll be able to get this at Harvard, I'm sure.
I'm sure they have it, yeah.
They have everything.
And if you want,
personal anecdotes about Bernard Ampman, including some unfavorable ones, which I think you should.
You know, we're not all such wonderful people.
I mean, there were some nasty ones, too.
So this is a memoir.
Beg your pardon?
Oh, go ahead.
I'm sorry.
Yeah.
And Ampman sort of really internationalized, revolutionized the
Canadian antiquarian book business, also made himself quite unpopular with some librarians, because he thought all librarians were a bunch of asses and didn't know a good book when they saw it.
And if you want information about Ampmann, personal information, you should ask Richard Landon, just as I pronounce it, Landon, Richard Landon, who is the...
A curator of rare books at the Fisher Library, S-H-E-R, at the University of Toronto.
Okay.
And still, obviously, there's a lot of information on him here in this, in this... There's a lot of it.
I mean, in this, there's an archive here, the original in the Bernard Antemont Papers Literary Manuscripts Collection.
The International Library of Canada.
Oh, the International Library, that's somewhere else, right.
But personal anecdotes, I think Richard is quite a ... I think Richard sort of didn't particularly like him, but has some good stories to tell about him.
And others went to Brazil.
I cannot tell you much about their story, but I know that there was an antiquarian book business in Brazil that was started by an Austrian, a fairly wealthy Austrian fellow whose name now I can find, but at the moment I don't think of it.
A cousin of mine went to Argentina and started an antiquarian book business in Argentina, which was quite successful in Buenos Aires, and one of his major clients was Borges.
Who was a librarian.
Borges was a librarian.
That's right, that's right.
And the way my cousin, his name was Paul Kynes, I think I mentioned him in my, like,
But, of course, then he changed it to Pablo.
That's one thing about our family.
We always made a great effort, and this occurred to me when I was writing this autobiographical sketch, we always made an enormous effort to learn the language of the country that we were in and to adapt.
Jews have had to always do that.
Exactly.
Right, yeah.
That's one of the reasons Yiddish is dying, because people, they have had to adopt a new language and where they've gone.
And the next generation, that's what Alan Lansky says in my book, you know, one of the reasons Yiddish is in such... Yeah, yeah.
I don't know if that's related to what you're saying, but it's essential to learn the language of every place that you go.
Yes, it is.
Well, funny to hear about Yiddish.
I have a...
nephew in Israel, part of my family, or my sister moved to Israel, and her grandchildren, who are now in the 20s, one of them was here recently, and I said, oh, by the way, do you speak Yiddish?
He looked at me and said, Yiddish?
Why should I speak Yiddish?
Of course not.
What kind of a silly question is this?
This is an Israeli.
Did you read my section on Lansky yet?
Not yet, no.
That's one of the best parts of the whole book.
I love it.
All right.
He's a collector who's collecting books to save a language.
Oh, yes.
The National Jewish Book Center.
I see.
And that's in a chapter called Destiny.
Okay.
You'll love it.
If you haven't got to there yet... No, I haven't yet.
No, as I said, I'm reading it slowly.
Yesterday, I got through Baskin.
That's why you didn't understand the context of what I brought up about Baskin there.
Well, Baskin, you know, Hosea Baskin was just here.
And I never knew that Dallas Library was as big.
You see, I learned that from your book.
I didn't even scratch the surface of the subject.
You're talking about language, having to learn the language.
Yes, having to learn the language, and then we adapted not only the language, but we also learned that you, you know, you adopt the mores of the country, and you try to
Blamed in, that sort of thing.
Maybe a little too much.
But, anyway, that was taken for granted.
When I lived in France, I mean, I, you know, obviously... This lecture, which I have here, and which you gave, and it's ten years ago now, wasn't it amazing?
I've got another copy at home, but I couldn't find it right away, so I bought another one.
And I said, look at you, let it sun.
And I bought this from the Colophon people.
I said, you'd think you would have had this someplace where we're with them.
The Colophon people?
Wait a minute.
Up in New Hampshire.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Gosh, imagine.
Because they look like a trade.
Oh, yeah.
I got two of these, and I bought them both from booksewers.
The next time you ask the author, you'll get a free card.
Oh, thank you.
You know, as an author, I prefer to buy another author.
I mean, what can I say?
But anyway, tell me how this came about, this interest in... Okay, I can tell you that exactly.
Terry Bellinger came.
And he said, Barney, you've got to give a lecture to my, to Columbia.
And I said, well, what do you want me to talk about?
And he said, what I intensely dislike is anything you want.
I like people tell me what they want.
Anyway, so, but he was very nice about it.
He says, pick any subject you want.
And so I thought, you know, when you talk to a group like that, and especially I owe you, owe it to Terry to do something special.
And I said, that's what I'm going to do.
And that's what started me?
To do the questionnaires as well?
Yes, yes.
So you hadn't done the questionnaires prior to this?
No.
And so I said, well, how do I go about this?
And so first I made a list of all the people that occurred to me, and I circulated that list to these people, and then I said, have I forgotten anybody?
And so a few of them, yes, I had indeed.
A few of them sent me back their suggestions.
Then I made up the questionnaire, and I sent it to everybody, and then I put together the questions.
It's an important piece of scholarship, you know.
I mean, if you hadn't done this at that point...
These names would... Yeah.
It's doubtful that they would have been pulled together in one list.
Right.
Yeah.
Well, there was one review, Dan Traister wrote a very nice review of it, and he said, this is terrible, because this cries out for more, you know.
Here I am.
Well, I think that, for instance, you know Honey Krauss.
She told me that she met you.
I just saw her.
And...
They must have a wonderful archive.
I think Marianne is very nice.
Oh, yes.
I was terrified when Honey phoned me after Krauss died and asked me to speak, be one of the speakers at the memorial service.
Because, you know how people think about Krauss.
I mean, we have some people that think about him.
Some people call him Krauss the Louse.
But, yeah, but he, whatever you want to say about him, and as I say, we're not necessarily nice people, but he was remarkable.
And so, I said that, and he, well, I think he, yes, he liked me, but what he couldn't understand is why I hadn't grown rich
And I think so.
So he had a slight, I won't say contempt, but... Arrogance, perhaps?
Yes, well, that he was.
So I told Honey, you know, you can't say no to her.
I've known him, I've known him forever.
And he was also close to my dad.
In fact, he sold his first book to my dad, as he says in his book, when he was in London.
And so I said, well, I'll do it on one condition.
that you don't ask me to be solemn.
And she said, oh, that's wonderful.
We don't want solemnity and all that.
So I was kind of funny.
I told stories, including one when he sort of gave me to understand that
I never really made it, you know.
Were your remarks published in that book?
Yes.
I told it down a little bit, because he talked in my talk, he said, now I know why you never got very far.
But what he actually said, he said it to me in Germany, he said, in his Viennese, he said, because he loved to talk Viennese, and he said,
Now I know why you never really made it.
How would you say that?
Now I know why you brought it to nothing.
But that's interesting, though, because... But to him, you know, if he didn't make money... I'm saying, but it is.
He just didn't come here to get away.
He came here to emerge triumphant, didn't he?
Yes, yes, indeed.
It wasn't just escape is irrelevant.
It's just, hey, I got to leave here.
Yes.
I'm going to go there.
And when I get there, I'm going to be very good.
Yeah.
I think this is really wonderful.
It is.
Well, it's admirable in some respects.
Of course.
Some people say that, well, you know, you marry a rich wife, it's easy.
That's not true.
It helps.
But as a friend of mine remarked about Krauss, he says, OK, he married a rich wife in the beginning.
If he hadn't,
he would have gotten just as far, but it would have taken him a little longer.
So, and this is absolutely true.
And my great thing that always was something that I had to contend with was that I never had enough money.
When I started, I started, you know, people thought that with the name Rosenthal, that means you know a lot about books and you have a lot of money.
And neither was the case.
It's time to make a lot of money as a bookseller.
Neither was the case.
So, well, in grandfather's time, you could.
And even now, if you... I love how you keep pointing at the grandfather.
And that doesn't show up on the tape.
By the way, there is the other one.
The Italian one is over there.
So, when you start a business and you have this horrendous lack of capital, that really...
It kept me back years and years, and to some extent still.
And I had far younger colleagues who made it, quote-unquote, much further than I in a much shorter time because, A, they had brains.
That's understood.
You need that.
And commercial know-how.
But also they had capital, and that helps a great deal.
An example would be, for instance, my friend Larry Whitten, who died much too young, a few years ago, or Kenneth Nabenzahl, I don't know whether that's... These were... and Marr, those booksellers.
And they were that, plus people who had capital.
And that's something I... At what point do you think that the... Actually, let's get back to the... I don't think we finished that story.
You started sending out the questionnaires.
Oh, yes.
And tell me what you asked them on the questionnaires.
In fact, I'm going to turn the tape on the other side.
If that stops, if you see that, stop.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, but that's why I... Must be kind of funny to listen to these tapes sometimes.
On the German tape, my grammar was so horrendous that I almost asked them to cancel the whole thing.
And they said, no, no.
It's so lively.
Anyway.
Well, I asked him the basic questions.
I don't think that I kept a copy of that, but I will give you an exact address of where these papers are nowadays.
I'll probably, if I can't get—was it a lot of stuff?
Yeah, it was a whole box full.
Oh, that might be worth .
Yeah, including all my correspondents with them.
But that— And that is open to— Oh, yes.
I can go and take a look.
Oh, I'm sure.
None of it's restricted or anything.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
It's restricted.
Well, I would trust your tact.
I'm trying to tell a good, a positive study.
What I can tell you, ask the basic questions, you know, date of birth, blah, blah, and then education, what's your educational background, and that's when I found out that I think, well, 90% had PhDs, including the wives, and then date of arrival, what did you do after you arrive?
And then, when did you go into business?
And a number of catalogues issued, you know, very basic questions.
And I also asked them, one question I asked was, how were you received by your American native colleagues?
Were you cold-shouldered by some of them, you know, professional jealousy?
And none of them were.
Cold-shouldered is what you said.
Cold-shouldered, yeah, is the term I used.
Madeleine Stern said that was maybe a bit... I sort of consulted her a little bit.
She said, well, that may be a bit of a strong term, but I left it in there, and none of them were.
They were all very cordially received and helped by the people here.
So those are the basic questions, and I just told them to write whatever they felt like writing.
Did they furnish any kind of anecdotal stuff?
Anecdotes...
In that sense, I don't think so.
There may be a few anecdotes, but mostly they said, like the Burnettes said, well, we went through the usual dishwashing stage, you know, that sort of thing.
And Zalox told me how they worked for a publisher.
Of course, no, don't forget, this was still the Depression.
And so, but in that...
I don't think I asked for much anecdotal information.
I asked sort of, you know, the basic facts, which then I put together.
After I find out, you know, that maybe they did some of that on their own, and maybe there was some... Yes, that's quite possible.
That's quite possible.
There must be some people now.
For instance, Lucien Goldschmidt.
I will give you... He gave a Malkin lecture.
Oh, he did?
Yes.
However, he talked more about the trade when he came here, came and all that.
It's not very personal, but I'll give you a copy.
I have it here.
So, and they all pretty much responded to you, though.
They all, the response was fabulous.
You got really interested in this.
I mean, to say a lecture.
I mean, you basically went about a major research project, didn't you?
You really undertook it.
Well, yes, and I did it because, as I said, when you speak to—it was—I mean, I respect Terry Bellinger greatly, and I thought that, you know, you owe him that, and also Saul Malkin, whom I knew very well.
I was knowing all his faults and all his—but we—we
I was a subscriber to the AB from 1953 on, I mean, for God's sake.
So for the sake of these two people, I thought I had to do something.
But it didn't take me all that long, you know, three months or so.
Well, I knew all these people, which was a great help.
And they were very enthusiastic.
They all said,
You know, hey, you know, it's high time.
Somebody did something.
So, therefore, the survivors will probably be equally as willing to talk to you.
Oh, yes, I'm sure.
I'm sure.
And how about people in Europe that you'd recommend I talk to?
And it doesn't just have to be booksellers.
Any people that might have been involved that would have good stories to tell?
Somebody said Pierre Brez might be worth talking to for one reason or another.
Yes, but Brez is...
I have a lot of confidence in my ability to get people to talk to me.
Oh, I would think you can write a book about Berets, yes.
But he's involved in this kind of thing in one way or another?
Not very much, really.
There are a lot of... Oh, yes, well, he's involved in the sense that Lucien Goldschmidt, who was the first one to come here for this invasion, was a partner at the time of Pierre Berets, but they split up.
So, other than that, Berets was not involved.
And there are all kinds of stories that people tell about Berets, including very nasty ones.
I don't believe them because there's a lot of jealousy involved, because he is so successful and he is such a...
He's among the three top booksellers in the world, let's face it.
And who would the other two be?
Sorry about that.
Well, I think, I'm talking about individuals now, not firms.
I would say Breslauer, but he's now also
I'm talking now about individuals and who have tremendous, a combination of tremendous connoisseurship and business and so on.
And, well, then perhaps I'm leaving out Quaritch because that's not an individual.
That's a friend.
Mags is a friend, too.
I'll think of somebody.
Okay.
Where does Tentred fit in, always?
Well, Tentred, he...
is a good example of somebody who has access to a large capital, and at the same time has good academic background, good training.
But he, like Sourget in France, they are simply, in my opinion, they're not my kind of booksellers, but they
And I'm not asking you to speak against anybody, by the way.
I'm not against at all.
They're wonderful booksellers, but they simply have a different way of looking.
This is a long tape that... I go over my tape and my quotes with you, by the way, before I use them.
You haven't heard anybody complain about their quotations in my book, have you?
No, because I go over them.
I give you an opportunity to fix it.
I want everybody to be happy with what I do.
So there's nothing...
There's no mystery about what I'm doing.
I'm coming straight ahead, and I want it to be right, and I want you to be happy with it.
So if you say something and say, gee, I wish I hadn't told him that, don't worry about it.
We'll work with him.
No, Tinsert, I have absolutely never had an unpleasant experience with him.
It helps me follow up on things.
I'll be honest, I'm thinking of doing something on him as well, not in this context.
And I think that he is very important when you...
talk about the rebirth of the antiquarian book which is in Germany.
He's one of the great personalities, yes.
You see, we're going with it.
There's a continuum.
Absolutely.
It has to swing back at some point, and it's probably swinging back.
It's swinging back, and... Okay, the tendrum may be very flamboyant, and he may pay high prices for things, but then he is buying a lot of wonderful books.
And he gets involved in his catalog.
Very much so, yes.
And he has...
Good scholarship in his catalogs, believe it or not.
I mean, one may be turned off a little bit, but you might think that it's just very showy stuff.
But first of all, he has very good knowledge himself.
And he also gets very good specialists to work for him, like Severin Corsten, who is one of the major German experts, I mean, who works with him and for him.
And then there is a much younger man now, Jörn Günther, in Hamburg.
Again, a man with a PhD in art history, very knowledgeable, good education.